README.md, before:

# deploy-to-neocities Template

Template for using GitHub to deploy a website to Neocities

## Instructions

This tutorial uses [GitHub Desktop](https://github.com/apps/desktop) and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com)

### 1. Downloading your site

1. Go to your Neocities dashboard (the dashboard is the page with all your files, click "Edit site" from the homepage)
2. Scroll to the bottom of the dashboard and click "Download entire site"
3. Save the `.zip` file
4. Extract this folder. Keep the Neocities tab open, we will come back to it later

### 2. Copying this repository

1. Scroll to the top of the GitHub page for [this repository](https://github.com/telnettrauma/deploy-to-neocities-template)
2. Click "Use this template" near the top of the page and select "Create a new repository" from the dropdown

![Screenshot of a mouse cursor clicking "Create a new repository" from the "Use this template" dropdown](https://i.imgur.com/lAQmMwI.png)

3. Name the repository whatever you want
4. You can set the repository to public or private. If you set the repository to private, only you will be able to see it on GitHub, but you can still publicly publish to Neocities.
5. Click "Create repository" and your repository will be created

### 3. Setting up Neocities

1. Return to the Neocities tab in your browser
2. Click the account menu in the top-right and select "Settings"

![Screenshot of "Settings" being hovered over in an account dropdown](https://i.imgur.com/i9V9Stp.png)

3. In the list of your sites, select "Manage Site Settings"

![Screenshot of "Manage Site Settings" being hovered over in the Neocities account settings page](https://i.imgur.com/NYWPQtQ.png)

4. Switch to the "API" tab
5. Select "Generate API Key"

![Screenshot of the Neocities API key screen](https://i.imgur.com/9iRvbuD.png)

6. Copy your API key. **Make sure not to give this key to anybody, as it will allow them to modify your entire site!**
7. Return to your repository on GitHub and click "Settings"
8. On the sidebar, expand "Secrets and variables" and select "Actions"
9. In the "Secrets" tab, scroll down to "Repository secrets" (**not** "Environment secrets") and click "New repository secret"
10. Name this secret `NEOCITIES_API_TOKEN` and paste your key into "Secret"
11. Add the secret

### 4. Moving files over

1. Return to the "Code" page in your repository
2. Click the green "Code" button and select "Open with GitHub Desktop." This will open GitHub Desktop

![Screenshot of "Open with GitHub Desktop" being hovered over in the GitHub repository Code menu](https://i.imgur.com/9K1NUvB.png)

3. Click "Open in Visual Studio Code" to open Visual Studio Code

![Screenshot of the GitHub Desktop interface with the mouse cursor hovering over "Open in Visual Studio Code"](https://i.imgur.com/LneVfRM.png)

4. Once Visual Studio Code is open, copy the files from your extracted site `.zip` folder and paste them into the `public` folder

> [!NOTE]
> Everything inside the `public` folder will be the structure of your website. For example, a file located at `public/file.html` will be `username.neocities.org/file.html`, or a file at `public/folder/file.html` will be located at `username.neocities.org/folder/file.html`

5. Now it's time to publish! You do this by creating a "commit." A commit is a series of changes that can be jumped back to. It doesn't matter how often you commit, do it as often as you like! Here are 2 methods to commit:

#### A. Visual Studio Code

1. Select the "Source Control" option from the sidebar (it looks like a line with a branching path)

![Screenshot of the "Source Control" button being hovered over in Visual Studio Code](https://i.imgur.com/pikR4kt.png)

2. Describe the changes you made in the "Message" box
3. Click "Commit"
4. Visual Studio Code may panic because you haven't "staged" any changes. It should prompt you to enable "Smart Commit Changes," which will allow you to commit all changes automatically
5. Click "Sync Changes" to publish them

#### B. GitHub Desktop

1. At the bottom of the GitHub Desktop sidebar, there should be a form to fill out details about your commit. All you need is a title

![Screenshot of the commit form in GitHub Desktop](https://i.imgur.com/hrWXatG.png)

2. Click "Commit to **main**"
3. Click "Push origin" at the top of the window

![Screenshot of "Push origin" being hovered over on GitHub Desktop](https://i.imgur.com/0lpnoos.png)

---

6. If you return to your repository page on GitHub and refresh, it should show the name of your commit at the top of the file list. Next to the commit title is an icon:
	- If everything went correct, this will be a green check
	- If something went wrong, this will be a red X
	- If it action is still in progress, this will be an orange circle
7. That's all! If you did everything correctly, you should be able to publish your Neocities site using GitHub

> [!TIP]
> You can erase the contents of this `README.md` file and write your own description here

# Optional

You don't have to do any of these

## Don't immediately update the site after each commit

If you want to make a commit without updating your entire site (for example, if your project is still a work in progress), you can make a separate branch for the live site:

1. Go to `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`
2. Look for this part near the top:

```yml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
```

3. Change "`main`" to "`live`" so it reads this:

```yml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - live
```

4. Commit this
5. Click `main` in the bottom left corner of Visual Studio Code
6. This will open the branch menu. Select "Create new branch"
7. Name this branch `live`
8. In the Source control menu, click "Publish branch"
9. Switch back to the `main` branch from the branch menu
10. Now you can make commits without affecting the published version of the site!

When you're ready to publish your site, follow these steps:

1. Switch to the `live` branch
2. Open the Source control menu
3. Under the "changes" section, click the 3 dot menu
4. Select `Branch > Merge`
5. Select the `main` branch to merge from
6. Click "Sync changes" to officically publish them
7. Switch back to the `main` branch from the branch menu

## Delete files deleted from repository on Neocities

Currently, when you delete a file from the repository, the file isn't deleted on Neocities. You can change this behavior:

1. In your repository, go to `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`
2. Near the bottom, you will see the following:

```yml
- name: Deploy to neocities
	uses: bcomnes/deploy-to-neocities@v3
	with:
		api_key: ${{ secrets.NEOCITIES_API_TOKEN }}
		cleanup: false # set this to true to delete files from your site when you delete them here
		neocities_supporter: false # set this to true if you have a supporter account and want to bypass unsuported files filter.
		preview_before_deploy: true # print a deployment plan prior to waiting for files to upload.
		dist_dir: public # the folder containing your site
```

3. Change `cleanup` from "`false`" to "`true`"
4. Commit this
5. Files will now be deleted from your site when deleted in your repository!

Commit message:

✏️update to explain the random text file

README.md, after:

# deploy-to-neocities Template

Template for using GitHub to deploy a website to Neocities

## Instructions

This tutorial uses [GitHub Desktop](https://github.com/apps/desktop) and [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com)

### 1. Downloading your site

1. Go to your Neocities dashboard (the dashboard is the page with all your files, click "Edit site" from the homepage)
2. Scroll to the bottom of the dashboard and click "Download entire site"
3. Save the `.zip` file
4. Extract this folder. Keep the Neocities tab open, we will come back to it later

### 2. Copying this repository

1. Scroll to the top of the GitHub page for [this repository](https://github.com/telnettrauma/deploy-to-neocities-template)
2. Click "Use this template" near the top of the page and select "Create a new repository" from the dropdown

![Screenshot of a mouse cursor clicking "Create a new repository" from the "Use this template" dropdown](https://i.imgur.com/lAQmMwI.png)

3. Name the repository whatever you want
4. You can set the repository to public or private. If you set the repository to private, only you will be able to see it on GitHub, but you can still publicly publish to Neocities.
5. Click "Create repository" and your repository will be created

### 3. Setting up Neocities

1. Return to the Neocities tab in your browser
2. Click the account menu in the top-right and select "Settings"

![Screenshot of "Settings" being hovered over in an account dropdown](https://i.imgur.com/i9V9Stp.png)

3. In the list of your sites, select "Manage Site Settings"

![Screenshot of "Manage Site Settings" being hovered over in the Neocities account settings page](https://i.imgur.com/NYWPQtQ.png)

4. Switch to the "API" tab
5. Select "Generate API Key"

![Screenshot of the Neocities API key screen](https://i.imgur.com/9iRvbuD.png)

6. Copy your API key. **Make sure not to give this key to anybody, as it will allow them to modify your entire site!**
7. Return to your repository on GitHub and click "Settings"
8. On the sidebar, expand "Secrets and variables" and select "Actions"
9. In the "Secrets" tab, scroll down to "Repository secrets" (**not** "Environment secrets") and click "New repository secret"
10. Name this secret `NEOCITIES_API_TOKEN` and paste your key into "Secret"
11. Add the secret

### 4. Moving files over

1. Return to the "Code" page in your repository
2. Click the green "Code" button and select "Open with GitHub Desktop." This will open GitHub Desktop

![Screenshot of "Open with GitHub Desktop" being hovered over in the GitHub repository Code menu](https://i.imgur.com/9K1NUvB.png)

3. Click "Open in Visual Studio Code" to open Visual Studio Code

![Screenshot of the GitHub Desktop interface with the mouse cursor hovering over "Open in Visual Studio Code"](https://i.imgur.com/LneVfRM.png)

4. Once Visual Studio Code is open, delete the text file in the `public` folder, then copy the files from your extracted site `.zip` folder and paste them into the `public` folder

> [!NOTE]
> Everything inside the `public` folder will be the structure of your website. For example, a file located at `public/file.html` will be `username.neocities.org/file.html`, or a file at `public/folder/file.html` will be located at `username.neocities.org/folder/file.html`

5. Now it's time to publish! You do this by creating a "commit." A commit is a series of changes that can be jumped back to. It doesn't matter how often you commit, do it as often as you like! Here are 2 methods to commit:

#### A. Visual Studio Code

1. Select the "Source Control" option from the sidebar (it looks like a line with a branching path)

![Screenshot of the "Source Control" button being hovered over in Visual Studio Code](https://i.imgur.com/pikR4kt.png)

2. Describe the changes you made in the "Message" box
3. Click "Commit"
4. Visual Studio Code may panic because you haven't "staged" any changes. It should prompt you to enable "Smart Commit Changes," which will allow you to commit all changes automatically
5. Click "Sync Changes" to publish them

#### B. GitHub Desktop

1. At the bottom of the GitHub Desktop sidebar, there should be a form to fill out details about your commit. All you need is a title

![Screenshot of the commit form in GitHub Desktop](https://i.imgur.com/hrWXatG.png)

2. Click "Commit to **main**"
3. Click "Push origin" at the top of the window

![Screenshot of "Push origin" being hovered over on GitHub Desktop](https://i.imgur.com/0lpnoos.png)

---

6. If you return to your repository page on GitHub and refresh, it should show the name of your commit at the top of the file list. Next to the commit title is an icon:
	- If everything went correct, this will be a green check
	- If something went wrong, this will be a red X
	- If it action is still in progress, this will be an orange circle
7. That's all! If you did everything correctly, you should be able to publish your Neocities site using GitHub

> [!TIP]
> You can erase the contents of this `README.md` file and write your own description here

# Optional

You don't have to do any of these

## Don't immediately update the site after each commit

If you want to make a commit without updating your entire site (for example, if your project is still a work in progress), you can make a separate branch for the live site:

1. Go to `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`
2. Look for this part near the top:

```yml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - main
```

3. Change "`main`" to "`live`" so it reads this:

```yml
on:
  push:
    branches:
      - live
```

4. Commit this
5. Click `main` in the bottom left corner of Visual Studio Code
6. This will open the branch menu. Select "Create new branch"
7. Name this branch `live`
8. In the Source control menu, click "Publish branch"
9. Switch back to the `main` branch from the branch menu
10. Now you can make commits without affecting the published version of the site!

When you're ready to publish your site, follow these steps:

1. Switch to the `live` branch
2. Open the Source control menu
3. Under the "changes" section, click the 3 dot menu
4. Select `Branch > Merge`
5. Select the `main` branch to merge from
6. Click "Sync changes" to officically publish them
7. Switch back to the `main` branch from the branch menu

## Delete files deleted from repository on Neocities

Currently, when you delete a file from the repository, the file isn't deleted on Neocities. You can change this behavior:

1. In your repository, go to `.github/workflows/deploy.yml`
2. Near the bottom, you will see the following:

```yml
- name: Deploy to neocities
	uses: bcomnes/deploy-to-neocities@v3
	with:
		api_key: ${{ secrets.NEOCITIES_API_TOKEN }}
		cleanup: false # set this to true to delete files from your site when you delete them here
		neocities_supporter: false # set this to true if you have a supporter account and want to bypass unsuported files filter.
		preview_before_deploy: true # print a deployment plan prior to waiting for files to upload.
		dist_dir: public # the folder containing your site
```

3. Change `cleanup` from "`false`" to "`true`"
4. Commit this
5. Files will now be deleted from your site when deleted in your repository!
